<pre>
  BIP: 100
  Title: Floating block size hard limit
  Author: Jeff Garzik <jgarzik@gmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2015-06-11
</pre>

==Abstract==

Replace static 1M block size hard limit with a hard limit that floats between 1M and 32M.

==Motivation==

# Long term, wean the bitcoin protocol away from any block size limit; let the free market establish a natural size limit equilibrium.
# Eliminate 1M limit as impediment to adoption.
# Execute a hard fork network upgrade within safety rails, gathering data and experience for future upgrades.
# Contain checks-and-balances that users must opt into, to enable system activation and growth.
# Validated growth: a large majority (80%) is required to change the value.

==Specification==

# Replace static 1M block size hard limit with a floating limit ("hardLimit").
# hardLimit floats within the range 1-32M, inclusive.
# Initial value of hardLimit is 1M, preserving current system.
# Changing hardLimit is accomplished by encoding a proposed value within a block's coinbase scriptSig.
## As per BIP34, the coinbase transaction scriptSig starts with a push of the block height. The next push is a little-endian number representing the preferred block size in bytes. For example, 0x4c(OP_PUSHDATA1) 0x03(size of constant) 0x80 0x84 0x1e(2MB) or 0x4c(OP_PUSHDATA1) 0x04(size of constant) 0x80 0x96 0x98 0x00(10MB).
## A new hardLimit is calculated at each difficulty adjustment period (2016 blocks), and applies to the next 2016 blocks.
## Calculation:
### Absent/invalid votes are counted as votes for the current hardLimit. Out of range votes are counted as the nearest in-range value.
### Votes are limited to +/- 20% of the current hardLimit.
### Sort the votes from the previous 12,000 blocks from lowest to highest.
### The raise value is defined as a vote for 2400th highest block (20th percentile).
### The lower value is defined as a vote for 9600th highest block (80th percentile).
### If the raise value is higher than current hardLimit, the new limit becomes the raise value.
### If the lower value is lower than current hardLimit, the new limit becomes the lower value.
### Otherwise, hardLimit is unchanged.

==Deployment==

# 75% rule: If 9,000 of the last 12,000 blocks are version 4 or greater, reject invalid version 4 blocks. (testnet4: 501 of last 1000)
# 95% rule ("Point of no return"): If 11,400 of the last 12,000 blocks are version 4 or greater, reject all version <= 3 blocks. (testnet4: 750 of last 1000)
# Block version number is calculated after masking out high 16 bits (final bit count TBD by versionBits outcome).

==Backward compatibility==

All older clients are not compatible with this change. The first block larger than 1M will create a network partition excluding not-upgraded network nodes and miners.

